# *MFRAC* Algorithm Specification

## Document Overview

This document will go over the high-level overview on the *MFRAC* design and flow.

The name stands for:

- M: Memoized
- FR: Forward-Reachability
- AC: Attractor-Collapsing

# 1. Purpose

*MFRAC* will hopefully assist in the efficient storage and simulation of entire generations of CGoL. It's main idea is rooted in the memoization of reached states, in hopes that collapses will start happening once said explored states are reached in future simulation runs.

Perhaps what may be a naïve approach for any serious tool for cellular automata research, I have the small hope this may be useful in the future for this to be used at least by fellow CA enthusiasts.

Thanatos, the "catchy" name I tried coming up with for the wider application, will include tooling for analysing and exploring the outputs of *MFRAC*.

# 2. Process

Configurations (my one-word term for the state of a grid), generated by a Conway simulator, will be passed on to *MFRAC*.

The following procedure takes place:

1. **Calculating the Canonical Configuration:** the "canonical" form of a configuration is the coordinate-normalized, rotation/mirroring agnostic representation of it. Take a glider for example, every 2 steps the same canonical shape is created despite being in a different orientation. This steps calculates that.
2. **Hashing:** the canonical representation is hashed and passed along.
3. **Collision Check:** the calculate hash is searched for in a persistent storage. If no collision happens, the algorithm diverges.
   1. **(No Collision) Memoization :** if no collision happens, the hash and its canonical representation are stored in-memory.
   2. **(No Collision) Resume Simulation:** *MFRAC* produces a "Resume" signal and the program goes back to Conway before starting **Step 1** again.
4. **Collapse:** if a collision happens, the "collapse" starts. The configuration that caused the collision has its successors traced until the end state configuration is found.
5. **Delta Reconstruction:** reconstructs each generation from the end state up the current chain of configurations, persisting the hash, next configuration hash, and delta. 
6. **Run Conclusion:** *MFRAC* returns a "Conclude" signal, informing that this current run arrived at a previously explored configuration.

# 3. Concerns

Due to the infinite nature of CGoL and its connection to the halting-problem, the idea of being able to map any set of configuration to a point where collision may even start happening sounds unlikely, since some small combination of even just 5 starting cells can lead to extremely chaotic generations.

However, my idea is to expand on thi~~~~s algorithm and its stored data once its version 1.0.0 is finished, and serve as a way of me stepping into the world of cellular automata myself. 